README.rst, before:

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/PyAthenaJDBC.svg
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/PyAthenaJDBC/

.. image:: https://circleci.com/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC.svg?style=shield
    :target: https://circleci.com/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC/branch/master/graph/badge.svg
    :target: https://codecov.io/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/PyAthenaJDBC.svg
    :target: https://github.com/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC/blob/master/LICENSE


PyAthenaJDBC
============

PyAthenaJDBC is a Python `DB API 2.0 (PEP 249)`_ compliant wrapper for `Amazon Athena JDBC driver`_.

.. _`DB API 2.0 (PEP 249)`: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0249/
.. _`Amazon Athena JDBC driver`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/connect-with-jdbc.html

Requirements
------------

* Python

  - CPython 2.6, 2,7, 3,4, 3.5

* Java

  - Java >= 8

Installation
------------

.. code:: bash

    $ pip install PyAthenaJDBC

Extra packages:

+---------------+------------------------------------------+----------+
| Package       | Install command                          | Version  |
+===============+==========================================+==========+
| Pandas        | ``pip install PyAthenaJDBC[Pandas]``     | >=0.19.0 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------+----------+
| SQLAlchemy    | ``pip install PyAthenaJDBC[SQLAlchemy]`` | >=1.0.0  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------+----------+

Usage
-----

Basic usage
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')
    try:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT * FROM one_row
            """)
            print(cursor.description)
            print(cursor.fetchall())
    finally:
        conn.close()

Cursor iteration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')
    try:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT * FROM many_rows LIMIT 10
            """)
            for row in cursor:
                print(row)
    finally:
        conn.close()

Query with parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Supported `DB API paramstyle`_ is only ``PyFormat``.
``PyFormat`` only supports `named placeholders`_ with old ``%`` operator style and parameters specify dictionary format.

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')
    try:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT col_string FROM one_row_complex
            WHERE col_string = %(param)s
            """, {'param': 'a string'})
            print(cursor.fetchall())
    finally:
        conn.close()

if ``%`` character is contained in your query, it must be escaped with ``%%`` like the following:

.. code:: sql

    SELECT col_string FROM one_row_complex
    WHERE col_string = %(param)s OR col_string LIKE 'a%%'

.. _`DB API paramstyle`: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0249/#paramstyle
.. _`named placeholders`: https://pyformat.info/#named_placeholders

SQLAlchemy
~~~~~~~~~~

Install SQLAlchemy with ``pip install SQLAlchemy>=1.0.0`` or ``pip install PyAthenaJDBC[SQLAlchemy]``.
Supported SQLAlchemy is 1.0.0 or higher.

.. code:: python

    import contextlib
    from urllib.parse import quote_plus  # PY2: from urllib import quote_plus
    from sqlalchemy.engine import create_engine
    from sqlalchemy.sql.expression import select
    from sqlalchemy.sql.functions import func
    from sqlalchemy.sql.schema import Table, MetaData

    conn_str = 'awsathena+jdbc://{access_key}:{secret_key}@athena.{region_name}.amazonaws.com:443/'\
               '{schema_name}?s3_staging_dir={s3_staging_dir}'
    engine = create_engine(conn_str.format(
        access_key=quote_plus('YOUR_ACCESS_KEY'),
        secret_key=quote_plus('YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY'),
        region_name='us-west-2',
        schema_name='default',
        s3_staging_dir=quote_plus('s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/')))
    try:
        with contextlib.closing(engine.connect()) as conn:
            many_rows = Table('many_rows', MetaData(bind=engine), autoload=True)
            print(select([func.count('*')], from_obj=many_rows).scalar())
    finally:
        engine.dispose()

The connection string has the following format:

.. code:: python

    awsathena+jdbc://{access_key}:{secret_key}@athena.{region_name}.amazonaws.com:443/{schema_name}?s3_staging_dir={s3_staging_dir}&driver_path={driver_path}&...

NOTE: ``s3_staging_dir`` requires quote. If ``access_key``, ``secret_key`` and other parameter contain special characters, quote is also required.

Pandas
~~~~~~

Minimal example for Pandas DataFrame:

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect
    import pandas as pd

    conn = connect(access_key='YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID',
                   secret_key='YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY',
                   s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2',
                   jvm_path='/path/to/jvm')  # optional, as used by JPype
    df = pd.read_sql("SELECT * FROM many_rows LIMIT 10", conn)

As Pandas DataFrame:

.. code:: python

    import contextlib
    from pyathenajdbc import connect
    from pyathenajdbc.util import as_pandas

    with contextlib.closing(
            connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/'
                    region_name='us-west-2'))) as conn:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT * FROM many_rows
            """)
            df = as_pandas(cursor)
    print(df.describe())

Examples
--------

Redash_ query runner example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See `examples/redash/athena.py`_

.. _Redash: https://github.com/getredash/redash
.. _`examples/redash/athena.py`: examples/redash/athena.py

Credential
----------

Support `AWS CLI credentials`_, `Instance profile credentials`_ and `Properties file credentials`_.

.. _`AWS CLI credentials`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html
.. _`Instance profile credentials`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSJavaSDK/latest/javadoc/com/amazonaws/auth/InstanceProfileCredentialsProvider.html
.. _`Properties file credentials`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSJavaSDK/latest/javadoc/com/amazonaws/auth/PropertiesFileCredentialsProvider.html

Credential Files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~/.aws/credentials

.. code:: cfg

    [default]
    aws_access_key_id=YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    aws_secret_access_key=YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY

~/.aws/config

.. code:: cfg

    [default]
    region=us-west-2
    output=json

Environment variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: bash

    $ export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    $ export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
    $ export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=us-west-2

Additional environment variable:

.. code:: bash

    $ export AWS_ATHENA_S3_STAGING_DIR=s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/

Instance profile credentials
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you create an EC2 instance profile with a policy like the following and attach it to the EC2 instance,
PyAthenaJDBC accesses Amazon Athena using temporary credentials.

.. code:: json

    {
      "Version": "2012-10-17",
      "Statement": [
        {
          "Effect": "Allow",
          "Action": [
            "athena:*"
          ],
          "Resource": [
            "*"
          ]
        },
        {
          "Effect": "Allow",
          "Action": [
            "s3:GetBucketLocation",
            "s3:GetObject",
            "s3:ListBucket",
            "s3:ListBucketMultipartUploads",
            "s3:ListMultipartUploadParts",
            "s3:AbortMultipartUpload",
            "s3:CreateBucket",
            "s3:PutObject"
          ],
          "Resource": [
            "arn:aws:s3:::aws-athena-query-results-*",
            "arn:aws:s3:::YOUR_S3_STAGING_DIR",
            "arn:aws:s3:::YOUR_S3_AWESOME_LOG_DATA"
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

In the connect method or connection object, you can connect by specifying at least ``s3_staging_dir`` and ``region_name``.
It is not necessary to specify ``access_key`` and ``secret_key``.

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')

Terraform_ Instance profile example:

See `examples/terraform/`_

.. _Terraform: https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform
.. _`examples/terraform/`: examples/terraform/


Properties file credentials
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you create a property file of the following format and specify the path with ``credential_file`` of the connect method or connection object,
PyAthenaJDBC accesses Amazon Athena using the properties file.

.. code:: properties

    accessKeyId:YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    secretKey:YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(credential_file='/path/to/AWSCredentials.properties',
                   s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')

Testing
-------

Depends on the AWS CLI credentials and the following environment variables:

~/.aws/credentials

.. code:: cfg

    [default]
    aws_access_key_id=YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    aws_secret_access_key=YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY

Environment variables

.. code:: bash

    $ export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=us-west-2
    $ export AWS_ATHENA_S3_STAGING_DIR=s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/

Run test
~~~~~~~~

.. code:: bash

    $ pip install pytest awscli
    $ scripts/upload_test_data.sh
    $ py.test
    $ scripts/delete_test_data.sh

Run test multiple Python versions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: bash

    $ pip install tox awscli
    $ scripts/upload_test_data.sh
    $ pyenv local 2.6.9 2.7.12 3.4.5 3.5.2
    $ tox
    $ scripts/delete_test_data.sh

Commit message:

Add JVM options section to README (fix #30)

README.rst, after:

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/pyversions/PyAthenaJDBC.svg
    :target: https://pypi.python.org/pypi/PyAthenaJDBC/

.. image:: https://circleci.com/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC.svg?style=shield
    :target: https://circleci.com/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC

.. image:: https://codecov.io/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC/branch/master/graph/badge.svg
    :target: https://codecov.io/gh/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC

.. image:: https://img.shields.io/pypi/l/PyAthenaJDBC.svg
    :target: https://github.com/laughingman7743/PyAthenaJDBC/blob/master/LICENSE


PyAthenaJDBC
============

PyAthenaJDBC is a Python `DB API 2.0 (PEP 249)`_ compliant wrapper for `Amazon Athena JDBC driver`_.

.. _`DB API 2.0 (PEP 249)`: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0249/
.. _`Amazon Athena JDBC driver`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/athena/latest/ug/connect-with-jdbc.html

Requirements
------------

* Python

  - CPython 2.6, 2,7, 3,4, 3.5

* Java

  - Java >= 8

Installation
------------

.. code:: bash

    $ pip install PyAthenaJDBC

Extra packages:

+---------------+------------------------------------------+----------+
| Package       | Install command                          | Version  |
+===============+==========================================+==========+
| Pandas        | ``pip install PyAthenaJDBC[Pandas]``     | >=0.19.0 |
+---------------+------------------------------------------+----------+
| SQLAlchemy    | ``pip install PyAthenaJDBC[SQLAlchemy]`` | >=1.0.0  |
+---------------+------------------------------------------+----------+

Usage
-----

Basic usage
~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')
    try:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT * FROM one_row
            """)
            print(cursor.description)
            print(cursor.fetchall())
    finally:
        conn.close()

Cursor iteration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')
    try:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT * FROM many_rows LIMIT 10
            """)
            for row in cursor:
                print(row)
    finally:
        conn.close()

Query with parameter
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Supported `DB API paramstyle`_ is only ``PyFormat``.
``PyFormat`` only supports `named placeholders`_ with old ``%`` operator style and parameters specify dictionary format.

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')
    try:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT col_string FROM one_row_complex
            WHERE col_string = %(param)s
            """, {'param': 'a string'})
            print(cursor.fetchall())
    finally:
        conn.close()

if ``%`` character is contained in your query, it must be escaped with ``%%`` like the following:

.. code:: sql

    SELECT col_string FROM one_row_complex
    WHERE col_string = %(param)s OR col_string LIKE 'a%%'

.. _`DB API paramstyle`: https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0249/#paramstyle
.. _`named placeholders`: https://pyformat.info/#named_placeholders

JVM Options
~~~~~~~~~~~

In the connect method or connection object, you can specify JVM options with a string array.

You can increase the JVM heap size like the following:

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2',
                   jvm_options=['-Xms1024m', '-Xmx4096m'])
    try:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT * FROM many_rows
            """)
            print(cursor.fetchall())
    finally:
        conn.close()

SQLAlchemy
~~~~~~~~~~

Install SQLAlchemy with ``pip install SQLAlchemy>=1.0.0`` or ``pip install PyAthenaJDBC[SQLAlchemy]``.
Supported SQLAlchemy is 1.0.0 or higher.

.. code:: python

    import contextlib
    from urllib.parse import quote_plus  # PY2: from urllib import quote_plus
    from sqlalchemy.engine import create_engine
    from sqlalchemy.sql.expression import select
    from sqlalchemy.sql.functions import func
    from sqlalchemy.sql.schema import Table, MetaData

    conn_str = 'awsathena+jdbc://{access_key}:{secret_key}@athena.{region_name}.amazonaws.com:443/'\
               '{schema_name}?s3_staging_dir={s3_staging_dir}'
    engine = create_engine(conn_str.format(
        access_key=quote_plus('YOUR_ACCESS_KEY'),
        secret_key=quote_plus('YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY'),
        region_name='us-west-2',
        schema_name='default',
        s3_staging_dir=quote_plus('s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/')))
    try:
        with contextlib.closing(engine.connect()) as conn:
            many_rows = Table('many_rows', MetaData(bind=engine), autoload=True)
            print(select([func.count('*')], from_obj=many_rows).scalar())
    finally:
        engine.dispose()

The connection string has the following format:

.. code:: python

    awsathena+jdbc://{access_key}:{secret_key}@athena.{region_name}.amazonaws.com:443/{schema_name}?s3_staging_dir={s3_staging_dir}&driver_path={driver_path}&...

NOTE: ``s3_staging_dir`` requires quote. If ``access_key``, ``secret_key`` and other parameter contain special characters, quote is also required.

Pandas
~~~~~~

Minimal example for Pandas DataFrame:

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect
    import pandas as pd

    conn = connect(access_key='YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID',
                   secret_key='YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY',
                   s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2',
                   jvm_path='/path/to/jvm')  # optional, as used by JPype
    df = pd.read_sql("SELECT * FROM many_rows LIMIT 10", conn)

As Pandas DataFrame:

.. code:: python

    import contextlib
    from pyathenajdbc import connect
    from pyathenajdbc.util import as_pandas

    with contextlib.closing(
            connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/'
                    region_name='us-west-2'))) as conn:
        with conn.cursor() as cursor:
            cursor.execute("""
            SELECT * FROM many_rows
            """)
            df = as_pandas(cursor)
    print(df.describe())

Examples
--------

Redash_ query runner example
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

See `examples/redash/athena.py`_

.. _Redash: https://github.com/getredash/redash
.. _`examples/redash/athena.py`: examples/redash/athena.py

Credential
----------

Support `AWS CLI credentials`_, `Instance profile credentials`_ and `Properties file credentials`_.

.. _`AWS CLI credentials`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/cli-chap-getting-started.html
.. _`Instance profile credentials`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSJavaSDK/latest/javadoc/com/amazonaws/auth/InstanceProfileCredentialsProvider.html
.. _`Properties file credentials`: http://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSJavaSDK/latest/javadoc/com/amazonaws/auth/PropertiesFileCredentialsProvider.html

Credential Files
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

~/.aws/credentials

.. code:: cfg

    [default]
    aws_access_key_id=YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    aws_secret_access_key=YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY

~/.aws/config

.. code:: cfg

    [default]
    region=us-west-2
    output=json

Environment variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: bash

    $ export AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID=YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    $ export AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY=YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
    $ export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=us-west-2

Additional environment variable:

.. code:: bash

    $ export AWS_ATHENA_S3_STAGING_DIR=s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/

Instance profile credentials
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you create an EC2 instance profile with a policy like the following and attach it to the EC2 instance,
PyAthenaJDBC accesses Amazon Athena using temporary credentials.

.. code:: json

    {
      "Version": "2012-10-17",
      "Statement": [
        {
          "Effect": "Allow",
          "Action": [
            "athena:*"
          ],
          "Resource": [
            "*"
          ]
        },
        {
          "Effect": "Allow",
          "Action": [
            "s3:GetBucketLocation",
            "s3:GetObject",
            "s3:ListBucket",
            "s3:ListBucketMultipartUploads",
            "s3:ListMultipartUploadParts",
            "s3:AbortMultipartUpload",
            "s3:CreateBucket",
            "s3:PutObject"
          ],
          "Resource": [
            "arn:aws:s3:::aws-athena-query-results-*",
            "arn:aws:s3:::YOUR_S3_STAGING_DIR",
            "arn:aws:s3:::YOUR_S3_AWESOME_LOG_DATA"
          ]
        }
      ]
    }

In the connect method or connection object, you can connect by specifying at least ``s3_staging_dir`` and ``region_name``.
It is not necessary to specify ``access_key`` and ``secret_key``.

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')

Terraform_ Instance profile example:

See `examples/terraform/`_

.. _Terraform: https://github.com/hashicorp/terraform
.. _`examples/terraform/`: examples/terraform/


Properties file credentials
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you create a property file of the following format and specify the path with ``credential_file`` of the connect method or connection object,
PyAthenaJDBC accesses Amazon Athena using the properties file.

.. code:: properties

    accessKeyId:YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    secretKey:YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY

.. code:: python

    from pyathenajdbc import connect

    conn = connect(credential_file='/path/to/AWSCredentials.properties',
                   s3_staging_dir='s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/',
                   region_name='us-west-2')

Testing
-------

Depends on the AWS CLI credentials and the following environment variables:

~/.aws/credentials

.. code:: cfg

    [default]
    aws_access_key_id=YOUR_ACCESS_KEY_ID
    aws_secret_access_key=YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY

Environment variables

.. code:: bash

    $ export AWS_DEFAULT_REGION=us-west-2
    $ export AWS_ATHENA_S3_STAGING_DIR=s3://YOUR_S3_BUCKET/path/to/

Run test
~~~~~~~~

.. code:: bash

    $ pip install pytest awscli
    $ scripts/upload_test_data.sh
    $ py.test
    $ scripts/delete_test_data.sh

Run test multiple Python versions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: bash

    $ pip install tox awscli
    $ scripts/upload_test_data.sh
    $ pyenv local 2.6.9 2.7.12 3.4.5 3.5.2
    $ tox
    $ scripts/delete_test_data.sh
